This document describes how to build CAM-readable SST and sea ice
concentration boundary datasets at an arbitrary resolution.  Two
Fortran-based executables are required to complete the process.  The first
(regrid) area averages or linearly interpolates input data to a target grid.
The second (bcgen) computes a climatology and modifies monthly mean values to
produce mid-month values such that linear time interpolation (e.g. as done in
a model) will reproduce the monthly means.  Algorithms devised by Karl Taylor
of PCMDI are used to accomplish these tasks.  His descriptions of these
algorithms are included as Fortran comments in the file bcgen/bcgen.f90.  The
final product is two boundary condition netcdf files suitable for input to
CAM.  One contains climatological mid-month SST values and ice
concentrations, and the other a multi-year time series of mid-month values of
these quantities.

Two netcdf files containing SST and sea ice concentration data, respectively,
are required input to start the process.  The data are on a one-degree grid,
and were created by Jim Hurrell and Dennis Shea of NCAR's Climate Analysis
Section.  These input data contain monthly averaged values for some number of
years.  Values over land are interpolated, so no land mask is required.  The
files provided with this distribution are
MODEL.had+oiv2.sst.mnly.49-01.unf.nc and
MODEL.had+oiv2.ice.mnly.49-01.unf.nc.

The codes have been tested on Linux, AIX, and IRIX systems.  In addition to
an f90 compiler (pgf90 or lf95 on a PC) and gnumake, it is assumed that
netcdf and ncl libraries are available.  ncl is only needed to generate the
template netcdf file for regridding at the target resolution.  An example
template file (regrid.T5.nc) is included in this distribution, so users
without access to ncl can generate their own template files using some other
mechanism.  If netcdf does not live in the default location of /usr/local,
gnumake macros LIB_NETCDF (for libnetcdf.a) and INC_NETCDF (for netcdf.inc)
need to be set either in the Makefile directly or as environment variables.

An example session containing the commands needed to build a T5 dataset on a
Linux PC are given next, followed by a description of what each of the
commands does.  On Linux systems, lf95 is the default compiler.  pgf90 can
also be used.  To do so, set USER_FC=pgf90, and change the definition of r16
in regrid/precision.f90 to selected_real_kind(12).  The latter change is
needed because pgf90 does not allow a real*16 data type.

gmake
cd regrid
REGRID.pl T5
./regrid -i MODEL.had+oiv2.ice.mnly.49-01.unf.nc -s \
            MODEL.had+oiv2.sst.mnly.49-01.unf.nc -o regrid.T5.nc -v
cp regrid.T5.nc ../bcgen
cd ../bcgen
./bcgen < namelist.T5


An elaboration on the above steps follows.

The first command (gmake) builds required executables in subdirectories
regrid/ and bcgen/.

"REGRID.pl T5" builds a template netcdf file named regrid.T5.nc, where T5 is
the horizontal resolution.  Other resolutions supported by REGRID.pl are T21,
T31, T42, T63, T85, T170, 10by15, 4by5, 2by2.5, and 1by1.25.  Non-supported
resolutions will require modification of REGRID.pl (a perl script), but this
is easy to figure out even if you don't know perl.

The command "./regrid -i ..." converts the 1-degree data to the output grid.
For resolutions coarser than the 1-degree input, by default the data are
converted using area averaging, and finer resolutions default to linear
interpolation.  These defaults can be overridden via a command-line argument
(-l for linear, -a for area averaging).  If running in verbose mode (-v
included on command line), points with both ice fraction greater than 50% and
SST greater than 6 deg. C are printed.  This is only a diagnostic and not
necessarily an indication of a problem.  After running regrid, the file
regrid.<resolution>.nc will contain SST and ice concentration data at the
desired output resolution.  If the code aborts with the message:

 NC_UNLIMITED size already in use

it usually means that the output file already has data in it at the target
resolution.  To fix it, just recreate the template file with the command
"REGRID.pl <resolution>".

The last step (bcgen < namelist.T5) creates the climatological mid-month
values and multi-year time series boundary data.  To run this code, first
copy or link regrid.<resolution>.nc into the directory ../bcgen.  The file
driver.f90 contains descriptions of the namelist variables.  Example
namelists are provided for T5 and T42 resolutions.  The only reason
resolution-specific namelists are used here is that the output file from
regrid (one of the namelist items) has horizontal resolution embedded in its
name.  At T42 one might for example run:

./bcgen < namelist.T42

In this example, output files outfilclim.T42.nc and outfilamip.T42.nc will
contain the CAM-readable boundary condition SSTs (variable SST_cpl) and ice
concentrations (variable ice_cov).  Versions of these variables prior to
modification for retaining the monthly mean via linear interpolation are
included in these files.  The variable names have "_prediddle" appended.

The file namelist.T42.oldtt is provided to enable bit-for-bit reproducibility
with already-existing datasets.  README.bfb lists the sequence of commands
necessary to accomplish this.

One important note on the climatological averaging period.  In general the
namelist variables defining it should NOT change from 1982-2001.  The code
checks for this and errors out if the values are set inappropriately.  It
also prints a message explaining how to change the climatological averaging
period if the user really wishes to do so.

Jim Rosinski, NCAR
April 16, 2003
